# Chapters 3-4

Date: 16 May 2020

Time: 1:30-3:00

Location: [Online](https://meet.google.com/xfy-wqgu-wdc)

Source: No Starch Press ([read chapter 3 online](https://automatetheboringstuff.com/2e/chapter3/), [read chapter 4 online](https://automatetheboringstuff.com/2e/chapter4/))

Previous notes: [Ch. 0](ch0.md), [Ch. 1-2](ch1-2.md)

Agenda:

**Topic for discussion** | **Sub Topic** | **Notes** |
-- | -- | --
Online meetup reminders |Online etiquette |:sparkling_heart: Make sure you mute your mic when someone else is speaking<br>:sparkling_heart: Feel free to use the chat function if you need help or if you don't feel comfortable piping up<br>:sparkling_heart: if at any point you might want to share your screen to illustrate something you are doing, make sure all visible content is appropriate. |
Introductions and (reintroductions) | Amount shared totally optional |:sparkling_heart: Name and where you are from<br>:sparkling_heart: Anything Python you want to share – also time for this later<br>:sparkling_heart: Question of the month?
Chapter concepts | 3 |:sparkling_heart: A function is like a miniprogram within a program <br> def statement: Defines what comes after as a function. <br>  The body of the function block fo text dictates what the function does. Code in the body of the function is executed when the function is called, not when it is defined.  <br> Purpose of function is to group code that gets executed multiple times --> use when code gets duplicated to ease changes and bug fixes
Chapter 3 vocabulary | `define` |:sparkling_heart: to create a function using the def statement
Chapter 3 vocabulary | `call` |:sparkling_heart: typing the function so that it an be used
Chapter 3 vocabulary | `pass` |:sparkling_heart: the act of giving a value to a function parameter<br>e.g. `print('Hello world')` passes 'Hello world' to the `print()` function.
Chapter 3 vocabulary | `arguments` |:sparkling_heart: Values that are passed to the function by being typed between parentheses
Chapter 3 vocabulary | `parameters` |:sparkling_heart: Variables in the function that are assigned an argument.
Chapter 3 vocabulary | `return value` |:sparkling_heart: the result of calling a function, when creating a function the return value is specified by the key work return.
Chapter 3 vocabulary | `return statement` |:sparkling_heart: Consists of the return keyword and the value or expression that the function should return.
Chapter 3 vocabulary | `None` |:sparkling_heart: Value that represents the absence of value, it is the only value in the NoneType data type and must be typed with a captial N.
Chapter 3 vocabulary | `keyword arguments (kwargs)` |:sparkling_heart: Positional arguments are indicated by their position. Keyword arguments have the keyword before the argument in the function call and are often used for optional parameters.
Chapter 3 vocabulary | `call stack` |:sparkling_heart: How Python remembers where to return the execution after each function call.
Chapter 3 vocabulary | `frame object` |:sparkling_heart: stores the line number fo the original function call and puts it on top of the call stack.  If another function is called another frame object with that line number is then put on top of the call stack.
Chapter 3 vocabulary | `local scope/variable` |:sparkling_heart: Occurs within the function.
Chapter 3 vocabulary | `global scope/variable` |:sparkling_heart: occurs outside the function.
Chapter 3 concepts | Reasons global and local scope are important |:sparkling_heart: 1. Code in the global scope, outside of all functions, cannot use any local variables.<br>2. Code in local scope can access global variables.<br>3. Code in a function's local scope cannot use variables in any other scope.<br>4. You can use the same name for different variables if they are in different scopes.
Chapter 3 concepts | Four rules to tell if a variable is in a global or local scope. | 1. If a variable is being used in the global scope it is a global variable.<br>2. If there is a global statement for that variable in a function, it is a global variable.<br>3. Otherwise, if the variable is used in the assignment statement in a function, it is a local variable.<br>4. But if it is not used in an assignment statement, it is a global variable
Chapter 3 concepts | `try` and `except` statements | These are statement used to navigate through errors when iterating through loops and other areas where you do not want your code to break because of an error| 
Chapter 4 vocabulary | `list` | :sparkling_heart: A value that contains multple values in an ordered sequence
Chapter 4 vocabulary | `list value` | :sparkling_heart: Refers to the list itself not the values inside the list values.  It can be used as a value and passed as an argument or stored as a variable.  Lists are indicated by a square bracket `[]`
Chapter 4 vocabulary | `list items (elements)` | :sparkling_heart: Values inside the list. They are separated by commas
Chapter 4 vocabulary | `index` | :sparkling_heart: The number starting with 0 that indicates the location of an item in a list.  Items are refered to by the variable name followed by square brackes with the index inside. Example: `spam[0]` selects the first element in the list
Chapter 4 vocabulary | `slice` | :sparkling_heart: A way of isolating more than one index of a list. A slice will not include the ending boundary, but only indices up to that number. (e.g. spam[3:5] will select elements 3 and 4, but not the element stored in index 5.)
Chapter 4 concepts | mutability | You can change a value stored in a list by indicating its index and declaring that variable.  Example: `spam[0]` = "aardvark" <br> You can concatenate lists with the + and replicated lists with * <br> del statement can be used to delete an item in a list. <br> Use lists when you have multiple, repetitive variables.  Commonly used when you need to write a loop because the code can access the index and value of that index <br> in/non in are used to determine if a value is in or not in the loop. <br>  :sparkling_heart: Key functions and methods <br> len() used to get the lenght of the list <br> enumerate() used for each iteration in the loop enumerate will return two values the index and the item <br> random.choice() from the random library, select an item at random form the list <br> random.shuffle() from the random library, reorder the items in a list <br> Methods are functions that are called on a value or variable.  Common methods are .index(), .append(), .insert(), .remove(), .sort(), and .reverse()<br> :sparkling_heart: Mutable objects are things that can be changed, immutable objects are things that cannot be changed.  <br> tuples are like lists except that they are immutable and created by being put in parentheses. <br> list() and tuple() are used to cast tuples and lists into each other <br> :sparkling_heart: References:  Variables actually store reference to computer memory locations where the values are stored, mutable variables change the reference location and immutable variables do not. <br>  id() is the function that returns the unique identity of the variable in the machine that is uses as the reference <br> automatic garbage collector: This is the part of Python that deletes any values not being refered to by any variables to free up memory <br> :sparkling_heart: copy.copy() creates a a copy of the list, from the copy library, copy.deepcopy() creates a copy of a list of lists and is also fromthe copy library |
