# Chapters 5-6

**Details** | **Agenda**
-- | --
**Date:** 15 August 2020<br><br>**Time:** 10:00-11:30<br><br>**Location:** [Online](https://meet.google.com/dxj-nevd-ypy)<br><br>**Source:** No Starch Press<br><br>([read chapter 5 online](https://automatetheboringstuff.com/2e/chapter5/), [read chapter 6 online](https://automatetheboringstuff.com/2e/chapter6/))<br><br>**Previous notes:** [Ch. 0](ch0.md), [Ch. 1-2](ch1-2.md), [Ch. 3-4](ch3-4.md) | <ul><li>[Welcome and review](#welcome-and-review)</li><ul><li>It's great to see you!</li><li>What have we covered so far?</li></ul><li>[Dictionaries and Structuring Data](#chapter-5-dictionaries--structuring-data)</li><ul><li>Intro</li><li>Impressions</li><li>Practice Questions</li></ul><li>[Manipulating Strings](#chapter-6-manipulating-strings)</li><ul><li>Intro</li><li>Impressions</li><li>Practice Questions</li></ul>

## Welcome and review

**Welcome!** | **Notes** |
-- | --
Online meetup reminders |:sparkling_heart: Make sure you mute your mic when someone else is speaking<br>:sparkling_heart: Feel free to use the chat function if you need help or if you don't feel comfortable piping up<br>:sparkling_heart: If you share your screen, make sure all visible content is appropriate. |
Introductions and (reintroductions) | :sparkling_heart: Name and where you are from<br>:sparkling_heart: Anything Python you want to share, especially if it's something you used after learning about it in chapters 0-6<br>:sparkling_heart: What hobby have you been doing the longest?

**Review** | **Notes** |
-- | --
Chapter 1: Python Basics |:sparkling_heart: tbd
Chapter 2: Flow Control |:sparkling_heart: No braces for if statements!
Chapter 3: Functions |:sparkling_heart: Also no braces for functions!
Chapter 4: Lists |:sparkling_heart: `[]`

## Chapter 5: Dictionaries & Structuring Data

**Chapter 5 heading** | **Notes** |
-- | --
The dictionary data type | :sparkling_heart:
Dictionaries vs Lists | :sparkling_heart:
The keys(), values(), and items() methods | :sparkling_heart:
Checking whether a key or value exists in a dictionary | :sparkling_heart:
The get() method | :sparkling_heart:
The setdefault() method | :sparkling_heart:
Pretty printing | :sparkling_heart:
Using data structures to model real-world things | :sparkling_heart:
A tic-tac-toe board | :sparkling_heart:
Nested dictionaries and lists | :sparkling_heart:

**Chapter 5 practice question** | **Solution/Notes** |
-- | -- 
What does the code for an empty dictionary look like? | `emptyDict = {}`<br>`emptyDict = dict()`
What does the dictionary with a key `'foo'` and a value `42` look like? | `dictA = {'foo': 42}`
What is the main difference between a dictionary and a list? | Dictionaries are unordered.<br>Dictionaries can have non-integer keys.
What happens if you try to access `spam['foo']` if `spam` is `{'bar': 100}`? | `KeyError`<br>Unless you<br>a) set a default value<br>b) try: `spam['foo']` except `KeyError`: whatever else you want to do<br>c) if 'foo' in `spam`: ...<br>d) if 'foo' in `spam.keys()`: ...<br>e) if `spam.get('foo')`: ...<br> You can also set a default value as you check for a key `spam.get('foo', 9)`
If a dictionary is stored in `spam`, what is the difference between the expressions `'cat' in spam` and `'cat' in spam.keys()`? | Trick question! There isn't one.
If a dictionary is stored in `spam`, what is the difference between the expressions `'cat' in spam` and `'cat' in spam.values()`? | `'cat' in spam.values()` returns the True/False of whether 'cat' is in the dictionary *values*, not the keys.
What module and function can be used to "pretty print" dictionary values? | `pprint`
What is a shortcut for the following code? | `spam.setdefault('color', 'black')`
```python
if 'color' not in spam:
    spam['color'] = 'black'
```

**Questions about Chapter 5** | **Notes** |
-- | -- 
tbd | tbd

## Chapter 6: Manipulating Strings

**Chapter 6 concept** | **Notes** |
-- | --
String literals |:sparkling_heart: tbd
Double quotes |:sparkling_heart: tbd
Escape Characters |:sparkling_heart: tbd
Raw strings |:sparkling_heart: tbd
Multiline strings with triple quotes |:sparkling_heart: tbd
Multiline comments |:sparkling_heart: tbd
Indexing and slicing strings |:sparkling_heart: tbd
The in and not in operators with strings |:sparkling_heart: tbd
Putting strings inside other strings |:sparkling_heart: tbd
Useful string methods |:sparkling_heart: tbd
The upper(), lower(), isupper(), and islower() methods |:sparkling_heart: tbd
The isX() methods |:sparkling_heart: tbd
The startswith() and endswith() methods |:sparkling_heart: tbd
The join() and split() methods |:sparkling_heart: tbd
Splitting strings with the partition() method |:sparkling_heart: tbd
Justifying test with rjust(), ljust(), and center() methods |:sparkling_heart: tbd
Removing whitespace with the strip(), rstrip(), and lstrip() methods |:sparkling_heart: tbd
Numeric values of characters with the ord() and chr() functions |:sparkling_heart: tbd
Copying and pasting strings with the pyperclip module |:sparkling_heart: tbd

**Chapter 6 practice question** | **Solution/Notes** |
-- | -- 
What are escape characters? | Allows you to define characters in strings that Python would otherwise ignore or error on.<br>Examples: `\n` for newline, `\t` for tab, `\'` and `\"`
What do the `\n` and `\t` escape characters represent? | `\n` for newline, `\t` for tab
How can you put a `\` backslash character in a string? | `'\\'` or `"\\"`
The string value `"Howl's Moving Castle"` is a valid string. Why isn't it a problem that the single quote character in the word `Howl's` isn't escaped? | We used double-quotes to define our string boundaries
If you don't want to put `\n` in your string, how can you write a string with newlines in it? | Use triple quotes to define boundaries on a multi-line string! `"""You can hit enter as much as you like in a multi-line string and those newlines will be interpreted as such without needing a \n newline escape"""`
What do the following expressions evaluate to? | (see individual lines)
`'Hello, world!'[1]` | `e`
`'Hello, world!'[0:5]` | `Hello`
`'Hello, world!'[:5]` | `Hello`
`'Hello, world!'[3:]` | `lo, world!`
`'Hello'.upper()` | `tbd`
`'Hello'.upper().isupper()` | `tbd`
`'Hello'.upper().lower()` | `tbd`
`'Remember, remember, the fifth of November'.split()` | `tbd`
`'-'.join('There can only be one.'.split())` | `tbd`
What string methods can you use to right-justify, left-justify, and center a string? | tbd
How can you trim whitespace characters from the beginning or end of a string? | tbd

**Questions about Chapter 6** | **Notes** |
-- | -- 
tbd | tbd

## Wrap-up

Share something you've learned from this book so far! Use the hashtags `#pyladies` or `#python` to connect with other Python language users/learners online. Tag us in your post so we can like and share it! We are [@clepyladies](https://twitter.com/clepyladies) on Twitter, [@clepyladies](https://www.instagram.com/clepyladies/) on Instagram, and [clepyladies](https://www.facebook.com/clepyladies) on Facebook.

Cleveland PyLadies website ([clepyd.org](https://www.clepyd.org/))

Cleveland Python User Group website ([clepy.org](https://www.clepy.org/))
